Blog post on design systems & GraphQL (#2334)
graphql/graphql.github.io: src/pages/blog/2026-02-12-better-together-design-systems-graphql-part-1/index.mdx

In this article, we explore a mock case study to paint a detailed picture of the problem and we hypothesize a radically new approach to cross-functional collaboration on both design systems and GraphQL schema design. This approach puts in place guardrails to prevent duplication while enabling quick iteration on new experiences. These practices aim to guarantee both UI and schema consistency, while protecting against the trap of unwinding bad patterns in production.

## Context

Our radically new approach comes out of a particular context and is therefore best for this context. While surely many of our ideas can be applied to other contexts, you should know that what we’re proposing assumes the following:

* We are powering multiple client platforms across multiple business domains.  
* We leverage the [server-driven UI (SDUI)](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/technotes/TN0032-sdui-basics/) architectural pattern to minimize client-side logic and facilitate consistency between client platforms.  

> * We use [GraphQL federation](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/) to hydrate clients with data via a unified GraphQL API that aggregates numerous microservices.  

Author: ```suggestion
* We use [GraphQL federation](https://graphql.org/resources/federation/) to hydrate clients with data via a unified GraphQL API that aggregates numerous microservices.  
```

*A pattern component is composed of atomic components and built to enable a user to complete a task or solve a problem.* 

Consider the following examples of Amazonia pattern components:

![][image2]

Atomic components enable site-wide consistency of UI across business domains and client platforms (both internal *and* customer facing.) By combining these atomic components into pattern components, we unlock user *experiences*.

Note: The user doesn’t go to Amazonia to “click a button” (an interaction with an atomic component); instead the user goes to Amazonia to “book a trip to Las Vegas” (an interaction with a pattern component).

Thus, atomic components are mechanical realities, while pattern components represent product realities that carry meaning to the user. The differences between these libraries—the atomic component library and the pattern component library—helps us determine who needs to be at the relevant schema design workshops.

## Why only Atomic and Pattern Components?

Before we answer this question, let’s first delineate the larger context.

> More and more organizations are adopting a [GraphQL-native approach](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/technotes/TN0037-api-gateways/#graphql-native). This unlocks the ability to *codify* the contract between data consumers and data providers. What used to be a polyglot system of BFFs, with unpredictability and a lack of standards between systems, has been modernized and replatformed into massive unified APIs all feeding into a single supergraph endpoint.

Author: ```suggestion
More and more organizations are adopting a [GraphQL-native approach](https://konghq.com/solutions/api-management-graphql). This unlocks the ability to *codify* the contract between data consumers and data providers. What used to be a polyglot system of BFFs, with unpredictability and a lack of standards between systems, has been modernized and replatformed into massive unified APIs all feeding into a single supergraph endpoint.
```
